It's not just about the images here, it's how you feel in your heart, that's the key.
It's about understanding pain, knowing it's not your enemy, it's life trying to show
you the person that you can really be.
Maybe I've been learning not to run away from the pain.
I know it's hard, everybody feels the same, but what I've learned is to step in out from
a gate.
I've stormed me to love instead of hate.
Thinking of the place I left behind, leaving for a memory is in my mind.
Sometimes it's hard to live and say, but things are meant to be the same.
I've laid through the place I left behind, leaving for a memory.
This land holds love as vast as the ocean.
Open hearts are never to be broken.
Living with two tongues, song and spoken.
Strong emotions are not scared to show them.
All of this connection makes people feel related.
That's how a lot of stories were created.
That's how we make many places become one.
Wrote to the future that all become.
This is a podcast about East.
Inrexam.
East stands for.
Ethnic youth support.
Team Wales.
Which is a posh name for a place where young people from ethnic minorities and their families
can come after school.
And have fun.
And have opportunities.
And feel that they belong.
And feel safe.
Some people who come here are refugees, are silent seekers.
Some aren't.
East support all young people and their families.
This podcast is about what it's like for some of us living in Wales.
And what we think about Welsh history and Welsh culture.
It's also about what we, in our turn, bring to Wales our history and our culture, our
own rich traditions.
We have created songs and poems and thoughts.
All the words in this podcast have been written or spoken by people in our group.
But sometimes their words will be spoken by other members of the group.
So who are we to introduce ourselves?
I'm Arleith.
I'm originally from Portugal.
I'm a youth worker here at least in Rexam.
I'm Tony and I'm a youth worker here at East.
Although originally I'm from Nicaragua.
I'm Gosha and I'm a regional youth worker here and I'm from Poland.
The song you heard at the beginning was created by Denise, one of our young adult members
here who studied music at college, with a bit of help from Diego.
Diego is 18 and he's at college now, but studying engineering, not music.
I'm Kelvin, I'm 12.
I'm originally from Portugal like I've ever met.
But now I live here in Rexam with my mom, dad, brother and sister.
School's okay though it gets loud and we get a lot of homework.
But it's good that I learn.
I like PE especially when we do basketball or football.
My name is Mercy Grace and I'm 11.
I was born in Nigeria and my parents come from two different places there.
From Joss in Benway and from Nicaragua.
After we left Nigeria, we lived in leads for a time before coming to Rexam.
I live with my mom, my dad and my two sisters and I go to Clare Dog High School.
I love school.
It's all about learning.
It helps you gain more knowledge for the future.
Also, it's a good and interesting way to make lots of friends.
I'm Trenaza and I'm Mercy Grace's younger sister and I'm nine.
I'm Latissia and I'm 17.
My name is Inshira and I'm eight.
I was born on the 24th of December in Cardiff.
And I live in Wales ever since.
Now I live here in Rexam.
I love baking cookies, pancakes and other desserts.
I've had a great time since we moved to Rexam and I've made lots of friends at school.
What I love is going to new places and chasing sheep.
I hope there aren't any Welsh farmers listening.
My name is Avi and I'm 12 years old.
And I used to live in London before we came here.
I live with my mom.
I'm in year eight at school and I love to play football.
I'm basketball.
My name is Noah and I am eight.
I'm Hadja and I'm eleven.
We didn't exercise for this podcast or we had to pick a word from a big bowl of cut
out words and write about it.
I chose a word past and this is what I wrote.
To me, London is more busy than Rexam.
Rexam is more quieter.
My past has been sad because my father always used to hit me and my mom.
Since we moved to Rexam, I've been scared because he was always hitting my mom.
But this was the past.
It's better now.
Although now I get bullied at school because of my turban.
People think silent seekers are always running away from war.
Sometimes they are not.
Sometimes they are just running from family relationships.
But some of us have sought refuge from violence in our birth countries.
Some of us have written or spoken about this for this podcast.
Some have chosen not to.
Diego, who helped write the song at the beginning, came from San Salvador, the capital of El Salvador.
He said he left five years ago because of the violence there.
He said it wasn't like a violent regime, more like two violent rival gangs fighting.
Tony here.
I was a journalist in Nicaragua where I did a degree in journalists.
But there were riots about pensions people were against the government.
And I wrote about how the government was not telling the truth.
Soon they were chasing me in the street.
And it was very dangerous for me.
So I left and I became an asylum seeker in Wales.
This was five years ago.
Since then I visit Cardiff and live in London, a handslet in Wrexon.
I'm a musician as well as a journalist.
I play guitar.
So when I was in Cardiff, I volunteered with Welsh National Opera and was in three professional
production as a volunteer.
My team composing and performing in a handslet, I volunteer as a youth worker.
Over four years I apply for refugee status five times.
And finally got it in 2023.
So now here in Wrexon, since I got my status, I can work as a pay youth worker.
So what's it like coming from somewhere else to live in Wales?
Well, again, I think living in Wales is way different from Portugal.
Here in Wales it has more bad weather.
Like Portugal has really good heart weather and our traditions and culture are way different.
And everyone is always nice and safe streets and people.
Wales has a very different culture to Nigeria too.
For example, we wear normal clothes at home like other people in Wales.
But in my culture, the traditional dress for women is a long skirt with a cold fushre
or a long dress wrapped around the body and tied up the waist.
In bright colour for fabric with a bumpy texture to it and hair ties that are like big pieces
of cloth wrapped around the head.
They are hard to tie and wear properly.
Only women wear these.
Girls wear headband.
We still wear our traditional clothes for church or special occasions.
Then there's food.
People in Wales eat pasta and fish and chips, but we eat different kinds of food, like
fufu, gari, pounded yam and some soups like egusi, okra and vegetable soup.
Longer dress in Wales people speak Welsh or English, but sometimes both.
But I have three languages.
Ibo from my dad, Tiv from my mum and now English.
Diego told us he had no English when he came to Wales, but now at 18 he's fluent.
I think living in Wales is good.
I think it's quiet and peaceful.
In Leeds it was a lot nausea because the roads were usually busy and cars were always
passing by.
In Leeds it was harder to sleep because it was always so noisy.
In Wrexham it's a lot easier to fall asleep.
Excuse me, wake up.
So what do you think of when you think about Welsh history and Welsh culture?
Tony again, what is Welsh culture for me?
Well it is a mix of culture, it is an interesting country and very friendly.
In my opinion, Mahanset has the richest culture.
People there live a simple life.
It seems to have more of Welsh language and the culture they are engaged better with
teenager.
They have a distinct call No Sons Saur or Laurin.
Like open mics, night where people can bring along violins and other instruments and play
music and sing.
When I think of Welsh culture I think of castles.
Umm, that was a beautiful countryside.
The Welsh flag.
The Welsh language.
Music maybe.
Singing.
Rugby?
We have written some poems and words about different aspects of Welsh life and culture.
Arna, another member of East, has written a poem about Welsh rivers.
River poem.
I like the river how it flows peacefully, moving past slowly gently.
I like how the wind ripples the surface, catches the light and glides and chimmas.
I like how the rocks split the river and the waters swirls wobbly round then.
I like how it's always moving, always changing, always singing its song.
This is Gossha again.
I have written about the Welsh castles.
On the hill of ways where the sea seems to the slip forever, stand majestic castles.
They are like fennful sensitors.
They are yielding to the passage of the time and the rustling of the wind, that carriers
memories of bygondays.
Free of them, Conwy, Carnarfon and Harlech, high history on their walls, like treads,
worn with the blood of heroes.
Conwy proudly raced above the river, attracts the eye with its silver walls, ship grace
on the green pastures that stretch as its fit.
The white silhouettes create a contrast with the lush green of the meadows, bathed with
the glow of the morning sun.
Carnarfon builds on the menace straight, looks all out over the surrounding landscape
from Estonia Hill.
The sroyal castle has witness many wars and rules who raised the sword in the defence
of freedom and the land of ways.
These mighty walls still bear the marks of the past battles and in their shadow history
comes alive in the minds of those who respectfully enter its gates.
Harlech, standing proudly on a cliff, watches over the stormy sea that crashed against
the rock at its feet.
It was here in the shadow of history that Honour was faultful, never giving up, even
in the face of the greatest challenges.
In the place where history interwines with nature, the wind carries the old songs of ways.
Stone and green create a harmonious hole and the castles of Conwy, Carnarfon and Harlech
stand unchanging, guarding the dreams of independence, hope and glory of the nation.
Hadja has written about castles too.
She wrote this, I want to see the people in the castles, I want to see the dresses and
the rooms and the books, I want to see the castles as they used to be before they got broken
by history.
I want to see the king and the queen on their thrones.
I want to see a suit of arbor tonight on a ghost's bones.
I wish I could be the queen.
I wish I could see all the things that have been.
Mercy Grace, in that exercise where we had to pick words out of a bowl, I picked the
word questions.
Some people I know say that asking questions like Hadja doesn't have poem is not important,
but I think it's very important.
Because if you ask lots of questions and you're always curious in class, you'll be very small
or brilliant.
Asking questions is a very good way to learn.
You can learn ahead and learn about the past and you'll get answers and be more knowledgeable
about a lot of things.
Diego told us he likes the culture of Wales, the history, the castles.
But he says things are much better in Salvador now than they were.
He says now if someone kills someone else, they get picked up and arrested in about five
minutes so he would like to go back there one day.
In October 2024, Arlette and Cadu, the organisation that looks after the Welsh castles, took a group
of us from East on a visit to Crickf Castle.
Tunaza here.
Afterwards, I wrote this.
Crickf Castle was made by two princes and destroyed by another prince.
It was a fun experience going there.
I am so happy that I got to see such a super-calor, fragilistic, expialledosius castle.
Victoria, another member of East, who also went on the trip, wrote a poem about the castle
called Castle in the Sky.
The magnificent castle, seen by all, a vision once imagined.
A shadow over those below, once history now a legend.
Fits for princes of all of Wales, mighty fortress soaring high, and our land and our nation,
a show of power in the sky.
Mercy Grace, I also wrote a poem about the castle, but from a very different point of
view.
I am a stone.
I have lived here on the beach for hundreds of years.
I am half white and half brown, and the bottom edge of me is also white.
I feel rough and smooth at the same time.
Back in the day, there was a castle at Crickf Castle, and I have seen everything that went
on in that castle.
I have looked up to it my whole life.
I can tell you all about it.
It was started by a Welsh prince and finished by another Welsh prince, but then an English
king came and took the castle away from the Welsh people.
So another Welsh prince came to take it back from the English king and burnt it down.
This is the story of the castle of Crickets, written by the glorious stone that has looked
up to it's whole life.
As well as her castle poem, Hadja has written a poem about the Welsh flag, like the ones
fluttering above Cricket's castle.
The Welsh flag is a red dragon.
It has three colours, red, white and green.
The dragon's feet are standing in the green.
The green of grass, the green of leaves, the green of apples.
The red is the colour of blood.
Of the jewels in the king and queen's crown.
The colour of fire.
White is the colour of a wall.
The colour of milk.
The white, like the whites of my eyes.
The flags fly above the castle.
They look beautiful.
Avi here.
I liked the trip to Cricket's castle because I liked the beach and we were next to the
beach and we had lunch.
The food was given by the castle, yum yum yum.
And then we went up to the castle and the food was so tasty.
I loved the view.
And we could put 20p into the telescope to look at the sea.
Thanks for the trip.
I met some new people.
Thank you Aile.
I appreciate you.
The castle was beautiful.
And now here is the writing by...
No, no, no, I am a...
And...
Me in Shira, age 8.
And these next bits are really nothing to do with culture or history at all.
But just go to show how imaginative our young people at East are.
I was told I wasn't very good at writing at school.
And I don't usually like it.
But in the workshop when we were giving a bowl of words to choose from, I chose the
way to enter.
And here's a funny story I wrote all from my imagination.
Here it is.
Once upon a time there was a pig that lived in the centre of McDonald's in Raxon.
And the burgers were all gone.
They turned the pig into burgers.
And teed just for the...
Who's going to eat a burger?
The end.
I chose the word memories and wrote a funny poem.
Here it is.
My best memory was when I said about my cheese sandwich.
More cheese, more cheese.
And I said it was such a dear please.
But I really wanted a tuna sandwich with two command carrot sticks.
I'd already asked my mum if I could have a normal toast with jam or porridge with a
bomb.
But I didn't see what food was already inside of me.
I am not Luna so I sneakily said tuna.
Write quite a lot about food don't we?
Food is comfort.
Last word about living in Wales.
I've developed since coming here.
I didn't know that when I first crossed over here that I would lose my identity.
In Icaragua I was a journalist, a song to my mum, a brother to my two brothers.
I had a girlfriend.
But coming to Wales I lost everyone.
I lost my identity.
My mental health became really bad but my friends I made in Wales helped me.
My friends from Wales National Opera helped me with mental health, with my application
for status, with everything.
I am here now because of these friends and I still have them.
For me Wales is the best place a refugee can be.
And East is part of that.
Supporting people in their lives here.
Helping to bring about the future of all our different experiences and cultures.
The place I left behind.
Living for the memories in my mind.
Sometimes it's hard to live and change.
But things are meant to be the same.